Azure

Design an App architrecture Solution:-
Messages vs Events: Events used for broadcasting (concept of publisher vs subscriber). Events lightweight than messages.
Design a messaging Solution:
Azure Queue Storage: To process messages asynchronously. Can be accessed using http/https. Size of messages 64KB. Queue may contain millions of messages and depends on capacity of Storage account.
Azure Service Bus Queues:
Azure Service Bus Publish Subscribe topic: Multiple receivers/destinations for a single message
Design an event Solution:
Event Hub messaging Solution: Supports streaming data. Collect events from real time scenario. Uses pull model.



Design Business Continuity Solution:-
Azure Backup Service: For Azure and Non-Azure Workloads. Azure backup vault vs Azure Recovery Services Vault (Azure key vault is different)
Azure backup vault requires components to be in same region.
GRS (Geo-Redundant Storage) in Azure is a replication option that stores your data in two geographically separated Azure regions, ensuring durability and high availability in the event of a regional outage.
LRS (Locally Redundant Storage) in Azure is a storage replication option that keeps multiple copies of your data within a single Azure region or data center to protect against local hardware failures.

Design for Azure Blob backup and recovery:-
Soft Delete and Versioning option
A Storage Account in Azure is a container that provides access to various Azure storage services, such as Blob, File, Queue, and Table storage
In an Azure Storage Account, a container is a logical grouping within Blob storage that holds blobs, which are files or data objects like images, videos, documents, or backups.
PITR point in time restore for blobs

Azure files backup and recovery:-
With the help of share snapshots we can take snapshots of our file shares and store it in recovery services vault.
Snapshots cannot be modified and also we cannot delete file share which has snapshots associated with it.
Creation snapshot process is manual. However using backup policies we can automate it.

Azure VM backup and recovery:-
By onboarding the VM to the recovery service vault and associating with a backup policy, we can take the backup of Azure VMs. Keep in mind of backup schedules and retention policy.
CRR: Cross region restore
Locally redundant vs Zone redundant vs Geo redundant
We can use Azure backup server if we have to backp VM located in on-premise

Azure SQL backup and recovery: 
We can use Azure recovery service vault.
We can go to SQL server and define backup and retention over there

Azure Site Recovery ASR:
DR solutions for Azure, on-premises and other cloud providers
We can do migration using Azure Migrate or ASR
Go to Recovery Service Vault and here we can configure recovey plan i.e which part we have to recover first for eg database is always to be first recovered in three tier application
Failover to the DR site is although manual by going to Recovery Service Vault we can also automate it using Azure monitor and trigger an automation runbook
When you have to failback to primary , create Azure recovery vault in primary and resynchronize, so its a back and forth procedure
In case of on-premise environment, backup agent and ASR mobility agent is running for the on-premise VMs. WE also have a replication appliance which has process server and configuration server which are responsible for collecting the data from the agents and providing to ASR

Design a non-relational data storage Solution in Azure:
Types of data: Structured, Semi-Structured (json,xml,yaml), Unstructured data
Storage services:
Container holds blob data
Files (NFS Soln) holds directories
Table (No SQL DB) -> Entitities
Queue -> Messages
Design for Azure Storage accounts:
Choose the storage a/c type
Design for data redundancy:
Replication strategy is based on SLA, durability and cost
LRS, GRS, ZRS, GZRS
Design for Azure Blob storage:
Choose the storage access tier
Containers in Azure are are like s3 buckets in AWS 
Design for Azure Files:
Accessing file shares: Using SMB protocol we can directly mount file shares on windows, linux mac os.
Using Azure File sync we can transform our on-premise windows server into cache of Azure file shares
HDD vs SDD storage for file shares
Azure blob storage vs Azure files (NFS) vs Azure Netapp files (supports multiple protocols)
SMB vs NFS
Design for Azure Disks:
Disk caching feature: we can optimize our read and write operations to virtual hard disks using this feature. Caching types None, Read-only, Read-Write
Securing data disks: using multiple encryption strategies. Azure Disks encryption, Server Side encryption, Encryption at host
Design for Storage security:
Storage accounts best practices: Limited access to storage accounts, Use SAS instead of sharing account keys, enable firewall policies, restrict access using service endpoints, enable private endpoints for hybrid scenarios, use CMK (customer manages keys from key vault), enable secure transfer (https)
In Azure, a Shared Access Signature (SAS) is a secure token that provides delegated, time-limited access to resources in a storage account, such as blobs, files, queues, or tables, without exposing the account's access keys.
Design for Cosmos db and tables:
Table storage stores NoSQL data in the cloud. Use Azure Storage explorer to access table created. Partition key, Row key.
We have another option for No-SQL DB i.e Azure Cosmos DB. Offers more high availability options than table. Automatic and instant scalability. It is fully platform managed solution
Azure cache for Redis
Table storage (replication through GRS) vs Cosmos DB (can be replicated across multiple regions globally)
Cosmos DB offers 6 apis : NoSQL, MongoDB, PostgreSQL, Apache Cassandra, Apache Gremlin, Table API
Design for relational data storage Soln:
Design for Azure SQL database: SQL on VM (IaaS), Managed Instance (Single, Instance pool) PaaS, Databases (Single database, Elastic pool) PaaS
Design for database scalability: Azure SQL database - DTU purchasing model vs vCore purchasing model
Database availability: Standard model, Premium model, Hyperscale model
Data security of SQL databases: 
  Network: Virtual Network, Azure Firewall, Private link
  IAM: Authentication, Azure RBAC, Roles, Row level security
  Data protection: Encryption in use, rest, flight, dynamic data masking
  Security management: ATP, SQL Audit, Vulnerability assessment, data discovery and classification
Design for SQL Edge: Relational database for IoT and IoT Edge deployments

Azure Data Integration Soln:
Design for Azure data factory ADF: Data will be ingested into storage blob -> Data Storage (Synapse for data warehousing) -> Azure Analysis Service -> Power BI for visualization
ADF can be used for Big data and relational data warehousing using SSIS SQL Server integration service. Using the ADF authoring tool you'll be able to set the pipelines from the GUI
Design for Azure Data Lake storage: It stores data in blobs or files. Scalable cost effective storage for Big Data Analytics. For data analytics go for ADLS.
Adhoc data, relational data, streaming data -> ADLS. This stored data can be accessed using Azure data factory, Azure Data expolrer etc. 
In ADLS redundancy is not set by default, need to setup replication.
Blob storage (flat namespaces, not compatible with Hadoop) vs ADLS (hierarchical namespaces, Hadoop compatible)
Enable Data lake storage Gen2 box while creating storage account to enable ADLS
Design for Azure Data Bricks: Fully managed cloud based Big Data and Machine Learning platform
Databricks SQL (Analysts can run queries against data stored in ADLS), Databricksd Data Science and Engineering (data ingested using ADF or any other ervice is stored in ADLS, this stored data can be read using DataBricks and create insights using Spark), Databricks Machine Learning
Databricks has control plane and data plane.
Design for Azure Synapse Analytics: Single service for data integration, enterprise data warehousing, big data analytics
Application queries -> Control node -> polybase fetches data from structured and unstructured data sources -> process by compute nodes -> resultant data stored in Azure storage
Different components of Synapse: Synapse Studio, Synapse Link, Synapse Spark, Synapse pipelines, Synapse SQL
ADF (cross region data flow supported, Spark not supported) vs Azure Synapse Analytics (vice versa)
Databricks (pytorch, tensorflow, kers supported) vs Azure Synapse Analytics (Azure ML built in support, Spark ML)
Design for Azure Stream Analytics: Fully managed PaaS offering for real time analytics for data streams
Design for Data Flow Strategy: hot vs warm vs cold data path
Use case: SQL DB -> Azure Data Factory -> ADLS -> Azure Synapse -> Power BI

Design Migration Soln:
Design using Cloud adoption Framework CAF:
Design for Azure migration framework: subset of CAF
Migration strategy: Rehost, Refactor, Rearchitect, Rebuild
Assessing workloads: windows, sql server, linux, applications, SAP Hana, Specialized workloads
Azure Migrate-> create project -> Assessment tool + Migration tool. Post assessment in assessment report we'll get the complete details including cost details
DMA data migration assistant for SQL server migration
Migration tools: Server migration, Database migration, Data box


