GCP

GCP regions consist of 3 or more zones (discrete data centers)
GCP region picker: It will give you recommended regions
Select Organization and Project post logging into GCP
Compute Engine for VM creation. We can create VM from scratch, from existing machine image, from existing template
Create firewall rules. It will ask for network (or vpc) and post creation this rule will be applied to all resources under that network
Resource hierarchy: Organizations, Folders, Projects, Resources
It is possible to access resources in one Google Cloud Platform (GCP) project from another project, both when the projects are within the same organization and across different organizations. Need to configure IAM roles accordingly

Billing in GCP:
Billing cycle for personal account -> month end
Billing cycle for Orgs -> year end
Go to Billing and you can see everything there
We can set budgeting alerts

Compute engine:
users -> vpc firewall rules -> compute engines -> persistent disks
Enable compute engine API
Click on SSH option to connect to VM
price per second usage
Compute engine machine types:-
scale out workloads T2D
General purpose: E2,N1,N2, N2D
High memory:M1, M2
compute intense: C2, C2D
Most demanding applications and workloads : A2
Persistent disks : are durable network storage devices that your instances can access as physical disks on a server
Scaling compute instance: Using Instance group (min, max, scalability rule i.e if collective cpu utiliz of instances goes > 80%, then scale, it will add one vm and wait for 2 mins)
While creating instance groups it asks for instance templates
Supports predictive auto scaling
Load Balancer: Concept to route traffic between different instance groups
Load balancer: http(s) LB, TCP LB, UDP LB
Set up health check while configuring LB
While creating instance groups , under Management section you can specify startup script under automation. If startup script fails the VM will not be turned off

Databases in GCP:
Cloud SQL: Fully managed MySQL,PostgreSQL and SQL server. We need to enable Cloud SQL Admin api. We can enable delete protection
Cloud Spanner: Suitable for Oracle
AlloyDB : for Postgresql db users
Non-relational :-
Cloud BigTable: Fully managed No-SQL DB column store like HBase or Cassandra
Fire Store : document based
Memory store: Fully managed Redis and memcached




Object storage:
Cloud Storage or buckets. Upper size limit is very high. Can be used for backup and archiving of data.
Post logging into GCP, make sure you are in the right project. Bucket name should be globally unique
Storage class: standard, nearline, coldline, archive 
Minimum storage duration : standard (none), nearline (30 days), coldline(90 days), archive(365 days)


To connect on prem to GCP use GCP Interconnect and VPN
Architecture Streaming data from IoT : Ingest to pub/sub -> pipeline Dataflow -> Cloud storage, Datastore, Cloud Bigtale -> Once we have the data we can do Analytics using Datflow, Bigquery, Dataproc -> Application and presentation can be done using App engine, compute engine, GKE
Architecture Log processing:  Microservice container engine -> Log collection (logging) -> Cloud storage and/or Pub/sub -> Dataflow (log processing) -> Big Query (log analytics)
Dataflow is a fully managed, serverless data processing service on Google Cloud Platform (GCP) that enables the real-time and batch processing of large datasets.

Security in GCP:
Data Replication
Adapt Single Sign On
IAM
Cloud Armor: Google Cloud Armor is primarily used to protect applications that are fronted by Google Cloud’s load balancers, providing DDoS mitigation and WAF functionality.
Threat detection: Set up rules to alert on misconfigurations

GKE: Autopilot vs Standard . Easy integration with load balancers
To use GKE enable Kubernetes engine API
Users -> Cloud Load balancer -> GKE (auto-pilot)
Cloud Run: To run containerized applications. Python, java, .NET, Go, Node.js, Ruby. Only pay when your code is running. Can be integrated with LB
Users -> Cloud Load balancer -> Cloud run 
Each cloud run container can take 80 requests by default at same time. Can be increased to 1000.

APIs:
Apigee in GCP: We can build APIs using this tool both in GCP and on-premises

Big Data:
IoT users -> Ingest data in Cloud pub/sub -> Cloud storage -> Cloud Dataproc (cleaning the data) -> Big Query -> Cloud VertexAI (AI)
DataProc : Fully managed, higky scalable service for running Apache Spark, 30+ open source tools and frameworks. ETL







